---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-03-04T16:06:01.697Z'
dateModified: '2016-03-04T16:05:22.359Z'
title: ''
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-03-04-f83892fe-c075-409a-ae50-44ead9aa229d.md
published: true
url: f83892fe-c075-409a-ae50-44ead9aa229d/index.html
_type: Article

---
Hybrid Water Heater

The hybrid water heater is much more efficient than most any of the other water heaters on the market.

In the hybrid's counter flow design, cold water enters from the bottom up as a way of self cleaning the sedimentation, while heat is pushed through 44 infra-red transfer pipes.

The condensing hybrid's innovative 3 cycle process pushes heat in 3 directions through the water and maximizes energy transfer. In simplest terms, our patent slows the exhaust of heat by reusing the energy multiple times, rather than reducing water pressure.

The end result is a small heat exchanger that is capable of replacing multiple tanks, while supplying endless hot water with consistent water pressure and doing it efficiently time after time.

**Features & Benefits of A Hybrid Water Heater**

* **316L Stainless Steel** Heat Exchanger, cabinet and a built in 2 gallon reserve tank.- Long lasting, quick supply & can be used with recirculating systems.
* Meets NSF61 Standards - Required by Plumbing Codes for health and cleanliness.
* Ultra low emissions (1ppm CO) leaves almost no carbon footprint and is safe. - Energy efficient & minimial carbon dioxide emmisions.
* Patented self-cleaning utilizes turbulent flow to flush sediments out. - No annual maintenance required.
* **98%+ Efficiency** - $aves money, exceeds Energy Star standards, and qualifies for Tax and LEED credits.
* Compact chassis can wall or floor mount; standard water connects on top. - Saves floor space.
* Flexible NG / LP / Indoor / Outdoor / Direct Vent / Power Vent conversions in one unit. - Only two sizes needed to fit all residential applications. Can be installed anywhere.
* 2" PVC up to 35ft or 3" PVC venting up to 100ft. - No expensive special stainless steel vent pipe required.
* Dual Core CPU displays error codes and optionally controlled by up to 3 remotes. - Easily diagnosed if there's a problem & variable control placement options.
* Clip-on components can be easily serviced by technicians. - Repairs quick & easy if needed.
* Full flow design enables high output without water pressure drop. - No restrictions to flow.
* Thermostat and Flow Activation is compatible with water sense low-flow fixtures. - Less than 1/2 GPM required to fire burners.
* Easy integration with recirculation and no startup lag -Eliminates cold water "sandwich".
* Meets UL / CSA / ANSI / NSF and UPC standards. - Safe and all plumbing codes approved.
* Industry's **BEST 20 YEAR** residential and 10 year commercial heat exchanger warranty. - No Worry Long Life.

**Call us today if you have any questions or if you would like to schedule an appointment at 501-666-9483!**